Hi, I'm Michael Jurewitz,
Apple's Developer Tools and
Performance Evangelist.
And today,
we're here to talk about performance.
Now,
great apps have terrific performance.
They delight users by being fast,
being responsive to user input,
and they use system
resources efficiently.
So today, we're going to look at some
tips and best practices for
helping your app perform great.
So let's get started.
So as I mentioned, we're here today to
talk about performance.
Now, performance is perhaps the most
important thing for you to pay
attention to in your application.
So you might be wondering,
what is performance?
Well, performance is about being fast.
It's about responding
to your users quickly.
It's also about being responsive,
making sure that as they
interact with the screen,
your application is
responding to their touch.
And it's also about being efficient,
making sure that your app is
responsive to your user input.
And it's also about being efficient,
making sure that you're using
system resources wisely,
so that as you go to use
something like memory,
you're just using the memory you need,
and you're not spiking all over place
and causing the system to thrash.
But beyond even that,
it's about having a great
impression with your users,
because they notice these things.
So you want to make sure that
you put your best foot forward,
so that you don't end up
with reviews like this.
People saying that your
app is slow and buggy,
or that... It crashes all the time,
or even worse, one star.
So today,
we're going to focus on teaching
you what you need to know to have
a great performing application.
We're going to take a look at how
to test and measure performance,
show you how to launch faster,
and also show you how you can
reduce your memory footprint.
So first, let's take a look at
measuring performance.
Now, the first question that
probably comes to mind is,
what are the things that
you should be measuring?
Well, in short,
you need to be looking at everything.
You need to be looking
at processing time,
how much time you're actually
spending on the processor
trying to get your work done.
You want to look at your memory usage to
make sure that you're not using too much,
that you aren't leaking memory.
You want to look at your graphics
performance and the correctness for
how you're actually doing your drawing.
And there are some important
points to pay attention to here.
You want to be looking at disk I/O,
so you know how you're
interacting with the disk.
And you want to look at battery life,
because your user wants to be able
to continue to use their iPhone
or iPad throughout the entire day.
But to look at all this,
you need some help.
And we've got an app to help
you do that called Instruments.
Now, Instruments is your one-stop shop
for all your performance needs.
And it gives you a holistic
view of everything that's
going on in your application,
from where you're spending that
processing time to how much memory you're
using and your graphics performance.
and battery life performance.
Now Instruments comes with a
ton of templates by default.
So let's take a look at a few of those.
First,
you've got the Time Profiler template.
This provides you low-level statistical
sampling of your application so you
know exactly where you're spending time
and what algorithms you need to tune.
Next, you have the allocations template.
The allocations template lets you
look at the memory usage in your
application to understand how
many objects you're allocating,
when you allocated them,
and look at detailed information,
like even their retain counts.
The core animation instrument
lets you look at that valuable
graphics correctness that
I talked to you about before.
It's a really,
really powerful instrument.
Finally, new in Xcode 4, you have the
OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument,
which gives you an in-depth look
at how you're using OpenGL and can
really help you tune that performance.
It's really vital,
especially if you're a game developer.
You also have the system activity
template so you can see how you're
interacting with the disk and exactly
what's going on on the device.
And finally,
the power and battery life template
lets you look at the power consumption
of your application and overall see
how it was draining power from the
device so you can better fine tune
things to reduce battery consumption.
Now, when you start looking at what
you need to do in measuring,
the most important thing is don't guess.
Now, I'm going to say that again.
Don't guess.
You've got a powerful set of
instruments at your fingertips to
figure out exactly what you're doing.
So even though you architected the
code and you've got a great idea for
what you think needs to be tuned,
measure first.
It's absolutely important
that you measure.
And most importantly,
you want to focus on simple, repeatable,
real-world actions.
Does your app have a table view?
Does the user scrolls through?
Tests scrolling through that?
When they tap on an entry,
do you load up additional
data or go out to the network?
Measure that experience specifically.
Focus on these small,
repeatable actions that you can fine tune
to make sure that they perform great.
And when you make a change,
make sure that you go
ahead and you retest,
that you verify that you actually
have made an improvement.
Because the last thing you want
to do is make a change that
causes things to perform worse.
And you want to keep iterating
until it just feels right,
until it feels great for
you to use in your hand.
Now when you're looking at
something like Instruments,
there's a few things that
you want to look for in
particular in your application.
With something like the
Allocations Instrument,
you want to make sure that
you're not using tons of memory,
and that it's not growing
monotonically over time.
Your app should ebb and
flow as it uses memory,
and it shouldn't just be
marching upward constantly.
Using something like
the leaks instrument,
you should absolutely not
have leaks in your app.
You need to make sure
that these get eliminated.
And we'll talk about how to
do that a little bit later.
And when you're using something
like the Time Profiler instrument,
you want to make sure that you're not
pegging the CPU and using all of the
available resources as much as possible.
You want to make sure that you're
tuning your algorithms to get
their work done and then stop,
so that you can do things like make
sure that battery life lasts longer.
Now when you're measuring performance,
you want to make sure that you
choose the right tuning environment.
And it's important to remember that the
simulator is a perfectly valid place
to do a lot of performance testing.
The simulator is fast,
it's got rapid turnaround,
and in this case of some instruments,
it even has additional options
that you can use to actually
improve your analysis.
So in the simulator, for example,
you can use things like Activity
Monitor or Leaks or Allocations.
Generally speaking,
the memory performance doesn't change
between the simulator and the device.
And so this is a perfect place
to test that kind of correctness.
But at the end of the day,
the device is where you need
to be doing your final testing.
And it's also where you need to be doing
the kind of testing like Time Profiler,
Core Animation,
or the OpenGL ES Analyzer.
Because those instruments and that
performance really depends on the
underlying device that you're running on.
You need to know how the
processor is going to behave,
how the graphics processor
is going to behave.
And so you want to make sure that
you're measuring where it matters.
So the simulator is great
for rapid turnaround.
You've got additional
memory debugging features.
But generally speaking,
it's unrealistic for things like timing.
Because of course,
the simulator is running
on your laptop or desktop,
which has got a really
powerful Intel processor in it.
And the device needs to
be the final arbiter.
So use it for all speed-related testing.
And make sure that any memory fixes
that you make in the simulator also
bear out when you test on the simulator.
All right,
so let's talk about launching quickly.
So now launching quickly is so
important because it's the user's
first impression of your application.
From the moment they touch your app on
the home screen and it begins to launch,
they're immediately forming
opinions about your application.
This is your vital opportunity to
communicate things about speed and
the quality of your application.
And you want to make sure that you're
putting that best foot forward.
So the common scenarios that
we're going to take a look at
in this section are both the
non-multitasking launch of your app.
So this is just when the user is
launching your app from the first time.
And we're also going to talk a little
bit about the multitasking resume.
This is when the user
double taps the home button,
presses your app,
and you get reanimated from
having been in the background.
So when it comes to launching quickly,
timing is everything.
The OS is watching your app constantly.
And slow performance will cause
iOS to quit your application.
Now this seems kind of drastic,
so why do we do something like this?
Well, it's very important that if
someone's using their iPhone or
their iPad or their iPod Touch that
the system remain responsive.
We want to make sure that they
can continue to use the device
for what it's intended for.
And if your application hangs
and stops being responsive,
then for all we know,
the application may never recover.
And so we need to make sure that the
user can continue to use that device.
So the timings we give
you are rather generous,
but you need to be aware of them so
that you don't run up against them.
So for example, for launch time,
you have 20 seconds from the time
your app launches to the time you've
done executing application did finish
launching with options and loaded your
first view to be able to start turning
the run loop and accepting user input.
If you take longer than 20 seconds,
your application is
going to stop running.
If you take longer than 20 seconds,
your application is going to get killed.
When you're resuming from the background,
you've got 10 seconds to come back.
When you're being suspended
into the background,
you have 10 seconds to do
any cleanup that you want.
And finally, of course,
if you're just being quit by the user,
you've got six seconds
to clean everything up.
And we also have Task Completion
API as part of the new
multitasking API in iOS 4,
so that if you have a long-running task,
like an upload that you need to finish,
you can get up to 10 minutes to
run in the background to be able
to finish that kind of activity.
Now, when you're measuring launch,
you need to test with
realistic data sets.
This is absolutely important.
Now,
when all of us are doing development,
it's really common for us to just have
a blank set of data that we're working
with because you've just built the
app and pushed it off to the device.
But if you've got the kind of app
that expects to be collecting tens,
hundreds, thousands,
tens of thousands of pieces of data,
and you've got algorithms that
load all this stuff on startup,
well, then you're going to go from
having launch quickly to possibly
having your app being killed on
startup for your higher-end users.
So make sure you're testing
for those real-world scenarios.
And you can do that by using
the Time Profiler instrument.
[Transcript missing]
So, let's take a look at a demo for
launching quickly with the Time Profiler
instrument so I can show you how
to find this kind of activity.
Okay,
so let's take a look at helping your app
launch even faster using instruments.
So first, we're going to open up
our project here in Xcode.
And I'm going to go to Build and Run so
we can take a look at what it looks like.
We're building our application,
it's being moved out to the device,
and we can see it's taking
a long time to launch.
We're waiting, we're waiting.
Still waiting.
And finally the content has come in.
And as you see as we scroll through,
we've just got a ton of content.
If you look at the
scroller on the right side,
you can get an idea for
just how much we have.
So clearly this took a long time,
and we'd really like this to be faster.
So let's look at how we can
optimize this performance.
So we'll go back to Xcode.
And now,
we're going to launch Instruments.
When we launch Instruments,
we're greeted with this series of
templates for us to choose from.
So we can take a look at the
memory usage of our application,
use the time profile of our instrument
to understand where we're spending time,
and even use things like
UI automation or look at the energy
diagnostics for our application.
In this case,
we're concerned about speed.
So let's take a look at the
Time Profiler application.
Now I'm going to go ahead and
choose Target and select our
Launch Performance application
and hit Record.
[Transcript missing]
Now if we go and we look at the
left side of the screen here,
there are a bunch of different
options for filtering the
data that you're looking at.
By default, the time profiler comes
with the call tree inverted.
When I'm looking at
information like this though,
I like to un-invert the call tree and
start at main and work my way down.
Now a really useful option if you're just
using Objective-C in your application
is to check this Show Objective-C Only.
You can also check flatten recursion
in case you have any recursive
algorithms and you just want to
flatten them into a single frame.
Now over here in the table view we've
got the actual data from the run.
And there's a few different things
you can look at in this data as well.
So if I control click on this menu,
you see there's a lot of different
stuff we can pay attention to.
In particular,
I want to look at self percentage.
Now we've got running time,
which shows a percentage,
and self percentage.
So what's the difference here?
Well, in the case of running time,
running time is going to show you
the total percentage of time that was
spent in this method and everything
else that it called through to.
In the case of self percentage,
what you're looking at was the time that
was spent just in that method itself,
so not the things that
it called through to,
like frameworks or other methods.
Now this is particularly important
because you're going to be able
to use this information to know,
do you need to optimize how
you're using the frameworks and
perhaps use them better or use
different ones to get better speed?
Or do you need to tune that method
itself to help it go faster?
Now from here,
the important part is just to
start stepping down the call tree.
And you kind of want to be a detective
and just follow this large percentage.
So we keep going down.
We see we're still at 96.3%.
We're in UI Application,
Handle Event with New Event.
We keep going, we've got more framework
code that we're working with.
We're continuing to
follow this percentage.
And finally, we've hit the
Launch Performance App Delegate,
Application did finish
launching with options.
Now,
if you ever do a trace and you see this
amount of time spent in Application did
finish launching with options,
again, this should be a big red flag.
You absolutely don't want to be
spending this amount of time in
your own code in that method.
Your whole goal at this stage should
be to kick off your application,
to get it running,
to do bookkeeping and take notes
for yourself about different
state that you need to set up,
but you shouldn't be blocking
while you do all this state
loading at this point in time.
So let's see exactly where
we're spending time here.
If I turn this down, we see we've got our
Sans View Controller calling
a method called parse.
If I didn't know this code,
this would already be
another red flag saying,
uh-oh,
am I parsing and loading data on the
main thread as part of launching my app?
Sure enough,
we've got this RSS parser here,
and we're telling it to start,
and it looks like it's
just parsing through XML.
Worse yet,
we've got this download and parse method,
so it sounds like we may actually
even be doing some network
activity as part of that.
And sure enough, we get into framework
code with NSXML parser,
where we're actually parsing this
XML from this feed that's come in.
Now, if you're looking at your
code and trying to figure out
exactly where you're doing this,
it's actually really easy
in Instruments to see that.
We can just double-click
on the method itself,
and we actually jump to the source,
so you can see exactly where
you are doing this work.
And if you want to go to Xcode
and be able to make a fix,
perhaps change how you're doing this,
you just press the little Xcode button,
and now you're back in your project.
And so at this point,
you want to be paying
attention to this method,
or even just how you've
architected this loading,
and try to make changes so that you're
not loading this data on the main thread,
and really that you're just
avoiding this parsing in general.
Alright, so remember,
the system will terminate
slow applications.
You want to make sure that you
collect data with Time Profiler.
You want to make sure that you defer
and otherwise just try to do less work.
Avoid blocking the main
thread at all costs.
And finally, optimize, optimize,
optimize.
Be using Time Profiler to figure
out exactly what you need to
improve in your application.
Okay, so that's launching quickly.
Now let's take a look at
reducing memory footprint.
Now, there's a lot of things going
on in the device at one time.
For instance,
you've got 12 megabytes of memory
that's going to the graphics processor.
You've got a good 36 megabytes
that are used by the kernel,
it's wired memory.
Approximately another 10
or so that are used by the
different daemons on the phone.
You've got the springboard,
the actual home screen
takes up another 8.
And then you have the processes
that actually make iPhone
and iPod touch what it is.
You've got the phone process,
the mail process, iPod, Safari,
all of those have a memory impact.
So it's important to understand that
there are other things happening
on the device at the same time
that your application is executing.
Now, iOS is a powerful operating system,
but it's not a desktop OS.
It's a very limited memory to work with.
At the end of the day,
this is an embedded device
that you're working with.
There's virtual memory,
but there's no swap file.
So while you're not sharing
memory with different processes,
all of the memory that you're
using has to stay physically
resident in the RAM on the device.
Now to help you work in these situations,
we also have low memory notifications
that are sent to every process on
the device to make sure that you
can work together to try to free
up resources as they're needed.
So as you can see in the chart,
there is a steady upward march in terms
of the amount of memory that's available,
but the system is going to be using
some of this memory for itself as well.
So you need to make sure that
you're architecting your apps
to use as little as possible.
And again, iOS has no swap file.
All of that memory has to stay resident.
And under sufficient
amounts of memory pressure,
the OS will actually begin
terminating applications.
Let's take a look at how that happens.
So we have this system
of low memory warnings.
And as we look at memory
increasing over time,
there's a few things that happen.
[Transcript missing]
Finally,
the last category is abandoned memory.
Now abandoned memory is sort
of a special kind of leak.
This is memory that is accessible,
but just in the own usage
of your application,
you never actually end up using it again.
So the classic example might be a
cache that you're keeping around,
that you only are putting objects into,
and you're not actually referencing it
for the information that you're caching.
And so you end up just sort of slowly
accumulating this memory over time,
and again, just like with a leak,
you're slowly suffocating yourself.
And so you can use the allocations
instrument with this brand new
heap shot feature to be able to
use your application and try to
spot this kind of heap growth,
so that you can go ahead and
reduce that and make sure that
you're not using too much memory.
Now as you're going along,
you want to make sure that you
don't ignore low memory warnings.
These are really,
really key to making sure that
your app and the rest of the
system continues to run great.
So what should you do if
you get a memory warning?
Well, first of all,
you want to make sure that
you release any objects that
can be easily reconstructed.
You want to release any cached objects,
things that you can read off disk.
Again, or that you really don't need,
you were just keeping
around in your caches.
And you want to make sure that
you unload cached resource files.
So say an image that you can just
go and read off disk again easily,
especially if that image
is not currently on screen.
So when you receive these
low memory warnings,
you want to make sure
that you take action.
But most importantly,
don't ask the user to do anything.
There's nothing they can do.
This is something that
you as a developer,
need to deal with in your application.
It's not like they can use your
application more conservatively or
somehow change what they're trying to do.
Now, when it comes to responding
to low memory warnings,
there's a bunch of different
places where you can do it.
First of all, UIViewController subclasses
can implement viewDidUnload.
And as we'll see in a minute,
this is actually very necessary.
In your app delegate, you can implement
applicationDidReceiveMemoryWarning
so that you can unload
any resources that you need.
And if you have any other objects
throughout your application that want to
know when a memory warning has come in,
so they can do things
like clean up caches,
then they can register for
UIApplicationDidReceiveMemoryWarningNot
ification and trigger
that behavior that way.
Now, UIViewControllers will try to
unload any off-screen views
when a memory warning comes in.
And they do this through
calling viewDidUnload.
But they need to know that the
memory warning is not coming in.
So they need some help
releasing views that you've
retained in instance variables.
So let's take a look at an
example of what's going on.
So let's say we've got our
application here that's got
this ComposeViewController
currently on the navigation stack.
We tap on the photo,
and now we've got this
PhotoViewController on the stack
as we're looking at this photo.
And at this point,
a low memory notification comes in.
So what's going to happen is,
is that the ComposeViewController
is going to notice that
the view is not coming in.
So it's going to notice
that it's off-screen,
and it's going to release its
reference to the UIView that it has.
But if you've got IBoutlets pointing
to other views in that hierarchy,
those are going to
keep those views alive.
So typically in your header,
you might have something
that looks like this.
You've got a property declaration.
You'll notice that property
declaration is declared retain,
which is how you declare IBoutlets.
And all of these are essentially going
to have those views then retained,
and they're not going to go away.
So what you want to make sure that
you implement is viewDidUnload,
so that you're going through,
you're setting each of
these outlets to nil,
and then calling super viewDidUnload.
And this is going to help that
ComposeViewController to be able to get
rid of that off-screen view hierarchy.
So that now, it releases its view,
viewDidUnload gets called,
and you release your outlets.
And then you can see that
the view did not go away.
and that memory goes away.
Now the best thing about memory
warnings is that you can actually
simulate them yourself in the simulator.
So if you go to the hardware menu
you will notice there is an item
called simulate memory warning.
This is a great way for you to verify
that the classes that you have in your
application are responding just the way
you think they should to memory warnings.
Now when it comes to multitasking
again the key is to make sure that
you are surviving in the background.
And it is also important to know
that low memory notifications are
not sent to backgrounded apps.
Once your app is in the background and it
has kind of been hibernated that is it.
The memory that you have already managed
to get rid of as you were going into
the background is your only opportunity.
And so you need to make sure that
you release as many reconstructable
resources as possible.
So when your app delegates application
did enter background gets called or
after you receive the UI application
did enter background notification.
Use that short period of time
that you have to reduce your
memory usage as much as possible.
Apps that use less memory in the
background have a lower chance
of being killed by the system.
Okay, so now let's take a look at memory
footprint and the allocations instrument
to help you figure out how to improve
the memory usage in your application.
Okay,
so let's see how we can get to the bottom
of tough memory problems that you might
run into when you're in development.
So first, let's open up Xcode and
take a look at our project.
In this case,
it's a project called Breadcrumbs.
I'm going to go ahead
and click Build and Run,
and let's take a look
at what this looks like.
So we've built the app,
it's being pushed out to the device,
And as we can see,
it's a pretty simple application.
We can go scrolling through it.
Notice we've got a bunch
of table view data here.
Pretty straightforward.
So let's go back to Xcode now and see
how we can use Instruments to look at the
memory being used in this application.
So we're going to bring up
instruments and we're going to
start off with the leaks template.
Now as you recall,
leaks are something that you
absolutely need to make sure
that your app is not doing.
So you want to make sure that you use
this instrument to get rid of anything
you see that involves leaked memory.
So we're going to go to Choose Target and
select our breadcrumbs application.
And now we're going to
go ahead and hit record.
And on the device,
we're now recording all of the
allocation information from the device.
As we scroll through the table view,
we see we can see all these
allocations happening.
And what Leaks is doing is
counting down to evaluating our
process and looking for leaks.
We can see it's analyzed it,
and sure enough, we found a bunch.
We actually see we've found 50
different leaks just through
scrolling through the table view.
So obviously, this is a big issue because
we've just scrolled,
we've already leaked well
over 2 kilobytes of data.
If somebody's going to be using
your app for a long period of time,
that can really add up.
And all of that is going to add
up against your app and slowly
suffocate you in the amount of
memory that you have to work with.
So let's dig into this and
see if we can figure out where
these leaks are coming from.
Now most importantly,
you'll notice the leaks instrument
is actually two instruments.
It's leaks plus its allocations,
so you can see all the different
objects that are actually allocated.
Now the allocations instrument has
got a couple interesting switches
that you'll want to know about.
So the first is record reference counts.
Now what this is going to do is pay
attention to every single object
in your application and look at
its reference count as it gets sent
different messages like retain,
release, malloc, free,
and it's going to record
all of this data for you.
Now another one you should know
about is called identify C++ objects.
Now this can be important if you're an
application that uses C++ because this is
going to allow the allocations instrument
to gain a whole lot more information
about your objects in your application.
So let's go back to leaks and actually
take a look at what was leaked.
You'll notice it looks like it
was a bunch of NSCF strings,
which probably means it was just
you using a bunch of NSStrings that
ended up getting leaked.
If we press this turndown,
we can see all of the 50 different
objects that were actually leaked.
And in this case,
we can see the responsible library
as well as the actual responsible
call that led to that leak.
If we bring in the extended detail view,
we can also see where the
allocation actually happened.
We get to see a back
trace for the allocation.
So let's just pick one of these
objects and see if we can get
a little bit more information.
So we'll click this little arrow here,
and this will actually jump into detailed
history for this particular pointer.
We can see the point in time when
the object was actually created,
and we see it's got a
reference count of one.
We see that it got retained
with a reference count of two,
and then it got released,
and that went back down to
a reference count of one.
Now at this point,
apparently the leak happened.
We lost a reference to this object,
but it's still around,
it still has a retained count.
So let's see if we can
figure out why that is.
Now we notice from this first entry
where this object was actually created,
that this happened in
our root view controller.
So if we double click,
we can actually see the code
where the allocation took place.
We see that sure enough it's an
NSString called SubtitleText.
And we just want to kind of scan
through here and see how we're using it.
We notice that we're using it
as part of another call here for
creating this breadcrumb cell.
It all looks pretty ordinary.
And later we do in fact release it.
So it looks like we're pretty
balanced with our usage of allocating
and releasing it in this method.
So there must be something
else going on here.
So let's go back to the pointer history.
Now we notice here at some point
this object gets retained again.
And interestingly,
our table view method is
still on the back trace,
but now we've got this setter,
this set location string.
So let's look at what's going on there.
Looks like when we
call setLocationString,
we pass in a string.
It makes a copy of what gets
passed in and just assigns
that to our instance variable.
Now,
the only problem here is that we're not
actually doing any bookkeeping to make
sure that the old value that was in that
instance variable is getting cleaned up.
So this looks pretty sure like
this is probably our leak.
So let's click the Xcode button
so we can jump to our editor.
And now we can go ahead
and select this text.
Let's paste in a new version here.
And in this case,
what we're doing is we're checking
to see if the instance variable and
the input are different objects.
If they are, we release the old value,
we make a copy of the new value,
and we update the instance variable.
So now let's hit Build and Run to
get this pushed out to our device.
We're building the app now.
There's a bunch of assets,
so it takes a few moments.
Our app is running.
We're actually going to stop it for
a moment just so we can go back and
verify the leaks have gone away.
So we hit record in instruments.
And now we're taking a
bunch of measurements.
And if we go back to the
device and start scrolling,
we see that we've got a
bunch of table view cells.
And if we look back at Instruments,
it's about to analyze our process.
And sure enough, the leaks are gone.
So this is how you can use the
leaks instrument to get rid of
those pesky leaks in your app and
reduce your memory usage overall.
So today,
you learned how to use instruments
to track down hotspots in your code,
identify memory leaks,
and use system resources efficiently.
I hope you'll be able to use
the information here to make
your apps perform even better.
I look forward to seeing
what you have in store.